---
layout: page
title: Salvadoran Archives
permalink: salvadoran-archives
show-title: true
---
## A Note on the Archives Listed
The archives below host a variety of perspectives, though admittedly, most of them host American-based materials. Universities in El Salvador are not well-funded, and thus, any archives do exist  are not accessible (to my knowledge) to a wide, online audience. Consistent searches asking for source materials to be in archival institutions <i>outside</i> the U.S. came up empty. Additionally, many of the links below only have physical objects, accessed via a reading room and in some cases, contain dead links and defunct contact information. This list serves doubly: as a window of a resource, and as a magnifying classs. These links house some very interesting content and can provide some research starting points -- through collections of Salvadoran student protest materials, letters between ambassadors discussing the Salvadoran Civil War, even some American critical reflection on their role in Salvadoran affairs. However, it also magnifies so much content not shown -- content that may begin to fill knowledge gaps about topics such as puppet governemnts that led to the explosive Civil War, immigration, and El Salvador's recovery process. It's up to the user to determine the utility of each source, so I deeply encourage critical exploration.

## 1. [Hoover Institution](https://www.hoover.org/library-archives/collections/el-salvador)

The Hoover Institution Library and Archives are an archival locus that house collections pertaining to war, peace, and revolution internationally. The Hoover Institution began through a donation from President Herbert Hoover to Stanford University, with the intention to maintain the “most important” global documentation from World War I. Today, the Hoover Institution serves to offer materials that provide research insight on political conflict with the goal of promoting peace. The over 6,500 collections are in the process of being digitized, and Hoover is a place that provides several educational opportunities for student researchers, experts, and even the general public. There are five collections beneath the “El Salvador” subject tag, which all relate to the Salvadoran Civil War of the 1980s. Two of these collections are U.S. policy materials, two are primary sources from the Salvadoran Civil War’s guerilla fighters, and one contains miscellaneous materials. None of the items are available online.

## 2. [Wilson Center Digital Archives](https://digitalarchive.wilsoncenter.org/places/el-salvador)

The Wilson Center Digital Archive is a locus of once-classified international government documents that are now available to the public. The Digital Archive is operated by the Wilson Center’s History and Public Policy program, which is the original physical archive chartered by the U.S. Congress. The Wilson Center is meant to be a research and teaching archive, and is a site that public policy scholars come back to to provide ongoing policy recommendations. It is also made accessible to students and journalists. Much of the WCDA is organized through category links. When looking up a topic to tag, one of the first items one will find is a popular item, figure, or collection connected to your search term. Under “El Salvador,” the first tagged “person” figure revealed is Fidel Castro. Items will file under connected “people,” “places,” and “topics.” Most items under each sub-category only mentioned El Salvador within its documentation, and most are declassified National Intelligence files. True to the archives’ name, all files are available digitally.

## 3. [El Salvador: 1977-1984](https://nsarchive2.gwu.edu/nsa/publications/elsalvador/elsalvador.html), from the National Security Archive

El Salvador: 1977-1984 is a physical collection of declassified government documents pertaining to U.S. intelligence on Salvadoran policy in the late seventies and early eighties. It is a brainchild of the National Security Archive – funded by George Washington University in Washington, D.C. – and serves to methodically declassify U.S. government documents under the protection of Freedom of Information Act, specifically to aid in journalistic research. The collection contains over 27,000 pages of government files that are contained within microfiches, and housed in cooperative publishing program Chadwyck-Healey. Allegedly, these items are available to all researchers. The only digitized items are two excised U.S. State department telegrams about El Salvador from 1985 and 1986, respectively, which are described as “heavily excised.” There is no direct access or ability to request the items on the microfiches, as the link to contact Chadwyck-Healey is broken.

## 4. [El Salvador: War, Peace, and Human Rights, 1980-1994](https://nsarchive2.gwu.edu/nsa/publications/elsalvador2/), from the National Security Archive

El Salvador: War, Peace, and Human Rights, 1980-1994 is virtually identical in character and source as El Salvador: 1970-1984. The former contains U.S. intelligence, defense, and diplomatic records pertaining to the Salvadoran Civil War, which played out through the eighties and early nineties. The digital collection is also directly linked to George Washington University’s National Security Archives. In this collection, there are over 6,000 declassified items, also carried in microfiches that are maintained by Chadwyck-Healey. There are five digitized sample items in this collection – two U.S. policy telegrams, one telegram about politically-incited violence, a military strategy document, and a photo of Salvadoran guerilla fighters. The link to access the remainder of the items on microfiches via Chadwyck-Healey is broken.

## 5. [American Archive of Public Broadcasting](https://americanarchive.org/catalog?f%5Bexhibits%5D%5B%5D=newshour-cold-war%2Fel-salvador&sort=asset_date+asc&f[access_types][]=online)

The American Archive of Public Broadcasting is a collaboration between the Library of Congress and the WGBH (a Boston-based public radio station). The American Archive was created to maintain American public broadcasting records from the past sixty years, in the effort to provide a robust source for American political, social, and public history. The American Archive is accessible to anyone and is created for scholars, researchers, and students alike. There are 2.5 million broadcasting items, and 68,000 items digitized for online streaming. The AAPB Online Reading Room is categorized largely via “exhibits,” which are carefully curated by topic. “Salvadoran Civil War: 1979-1992” is one such exhibit, and houses seventeen completely digitized items. Most are broadcast journalists discussing the Civil War throughout the eighties, debating the U.S.’s role. One such item is actually a reflection on relatively modern immigration policy – a broadcast from 2014 linking Salvadoran immigration waves to U.S. policies made by the Carter and Reagan administrations. There are other digitized items, mostly in the form of interviews, that are available under the simple “El Salvador” search term, that may reflect the experiences of Salvadoran and Salvadoran-Americans as well. [Listen to sample interview here.](https://americanarchive.org/catalog/cpb-aacip_500-2r3nv9b462)

## 6. [The Freedom Archives](https://search.freedomarchives.org/search.php?view_collection=320)

The Freedom Archives is located in Berkeley, California and is a non-profit educational-forward archive. It serves to maintain items from progressive movements and culture in the 1960s through 1990s, across the globe. The Freedom Archives is almost primarily a teaching resource, and uses its records to create documentaries for schools and teaching organizations. The FA strives to shed light on marginalized voices, and uplift pioneering activists and change-makers that have helped shape modern international policy and social justice. Within the archive, there are both print and digital materials, and the FA is working to continue to digitize items. One can browse by collection or search term, and certain topics, places, and people may overlap with a collection title. The El Salvador collection contains sixty-one items that focus on the post-colonial period and Civil War. Many of the Civil War items are specifically centered around the guerilla FMLN party, which bound together to overthrow the pseudo-democratic Salvadoran government. Out of these sixty-one items, only three are digitized.

## 7. [University of Colorado Boulder Libraries](https://archives.colorado.edu/repositories/2/resources/521)

The University of Colorado, Boulder library site is more of a database of rare and distinctive collections. In being a database, it serves to point students of UCB towards certain sources within their reach, that are only accessible via a physical reading room. The UCB site contains over 1,700 finding aids for their Rare Books and Archives, and can only be interacted with in the UCB Norlin Library. There are about six different collections, all physical, that pertain to El Salvador directly. Some of these include items from around the time of the Salvadoran Civil War, and most have items that recount killings, extrajudicial executions, disappearances, torture, and other human rights abuses, and seem to come from within El Salvador itself, as they are written in Spanish and come from Central-American organization records. Others are from within the U.S., and actually record U.S. citizen response to U.S. policy occurring during the Civil War that affected Salvadoran civilians. Nothing is digitized.

